This code is associated with the paper from Chittajallu et al., "Activity-dependent tuning of intrinsic excitability in mouse and human neurogliaform cells". eLife, 2020. http://doi.org/10.7554/eLife.57571



# Mouse-CGE-NGFCs
Data and code for Chittajallu et al., 2020 'Activity-dependent tuning of intrinsic excitability in mouse and human neurogliaform cells'  https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.03.24.004465v2

#Analyses of single cell RNAseq (scRNAseq) transcriptomic data available from the Allen Brain Institute:

To analyze the Allen Institute mouse dataset of the single-cell transcriptomes of ~76,000 cells from >20 areas of mouse cortex and hippocampus, we downloaded the transcript.tome/HDF5 file (https://portal.brain-map.org/atlases-and-data/rnaseq) and subsequently converted into Seurat v3-compatible format based on the instructions provided in the Allen Institute Portal (https://portal.brainmap.org/atlases-and-data/rnaseq/protocols-mouse-cortex-and-hippocampus) and custom scripts in R package. Basic processing and visualization of the scRNA-seq data were performed with the Seurat v3 in R(Butler et al., 2018; Stuart et al., 2019). Briefly, data was preprocessed by removing cells with less than 200 detectable genes and with reads mapping to mitochondrial genes comprising more than 0.05% of total reads. Gene expression counts were then log normalized and the resulting expression matrix was scaled to 10,000 transcripts per cell. Next, the expression values of each gene across all the cells (zscore transformation) were utilized for dimensionality reduction. These were performed using the NormalizeData() and ScaleData() functions in Seurat with default parameters. Next, we identified the top 2000 genes that exhibited high variability across cells and therefore represent unique features of the cell clusters, for downstream analysis using the FindVariableGenes() function, by applying selection.method = “vst” feature. Next, principal component analysis (PCA) was performed, and the top 20 principal components were stored. We clustered the cells using the FindClusters() with a clustering resolution set
to 0.6. This approach generated a total of 38 clusters. Using the FindAllMarkers() function at cutoff of genes expressed in 25% of cells, at a logfc.threshold = 0.25, we identified the genes that are expressed in each cluster. For each cell type we used the well-established marker genes that uniquely established the cell identity, as previously described in the literature. Notably, Snap25 positive clusters were annotated as neurons, and the Snap25 negative clusters were annotated as non-neurons; among the neurons, Slc17a7 was indicative of glutamatergic and Gad1 expression indicative of GABAergic neurons (Supplementary Figure 4A). More specifically, the Gad1 clusters expressing a combination of Lhx6, Pvalb, Sst, Hapln1 are indicative of MGE-derived GABAergic interneurons, and a combination of Lhx6-
negative, Prox1, Vip, Calb2, Cnr1, Hapln1, Ndnf are indicative of CGE-derived GABAergic interneurons (Supplementary Figure 4B). Relevant for the present study, specific-markers include, but are not limited to: Gad1, Prox1, Hapln1, Lamp5, Ndnf, but Lhx6 negative, for the CGE-NGFCs(Mayer et al., 2018; Tasic et al., 2018); Slc17a7, Wfs1, Fibcd1, Crym for the hippocampal pyramidal neurons(Cembrowski, Bachman, et al., 2016; Cembrowski, Wang, Sugino, Shields, & Spruston, 2016). The expression of KCN genes and auxiliary subunits were obtained for the above clusters, and the Violin/Split-violin plots were plotted via custom scripts in the R package using ggplot.
